# VM WG Summit

* Date: 2016-12-01 (Collaborators’ Summit - Austin)
* Issue: <https://github.com/nodejs/summit/issues/19>
* Notes: <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1D7-RBkuJiakADIWXOBVNyb6FNSXdoE3XIEXZ1axq97Q>


## Attendees

* Arunesh Chandra (@aruneshchandra)
* Josh Gavant (@joshgav)
* Matteo Collina (@mcollina)
* CJ Ihrig (@cjihrig)
* Jeremiah Senkpiel (@Fishrock123)
* Rod Vagg (@rvagg)
* Taylor Woll (@boingoing)
* Hitesh Kanwathirtha (@digitalinfinity)
* James Snell (@jasnell)
* Stephen Belanger (@qard)
* Michael Dawson (@mhdawson)
* Mark Marron (@mrkmarron)
* Bert Belder (@piscisaureus)
* Myles Borins (@thealphanerd)
* JeongHoon Byun (@outsideris)
* Seth Thompson (@s3ththompson)
* Charlie Robbins (@indexzero)
* Dan Shaw (@dshaw)


## Agenda

* Node.js Native API (NAPI)
* FFI
* VM compliance spec
* Next steps


## Node.js Native API (NAPI)

* [Repo](https://github.com/nodejs/abi-stable-node)
* [EP](https://github.com/nodejs/node-eps/pull/20)
* [Roadmap](https://github.com/nodejs/abi-stable-node/issues/18)


General roadmap:

1. Stable NAPI for use with native modules. NAN is currently used by many native
modules; NAPI is addressing weaknesses of NAN abstractions, specifically
leaking V8 APIs.
2. Adoption by native modules in the ecosystem.
3. Adoption by builtin modules in core. These directly use V8 APIs, will
eventually need to use NAPI.

@rvagg: TJ worked on a stable abstraction for a native ABI, but was too
difficult because of changes in V8. How confident are we that this ABI will
actually be stable for a long term, e.g. 12 months?

@mhdawson: Goal has been to prove that current ABI works with 0.10, 0.12, 4.0,
6.0, and even ChakraCore. Some adjustments were needed, but it wasn’t that
difficult to hide changes between versions. Proving that this approach works

@rvagg: What about significant future changes in V8? Do we have their buy-in?

@jasnell: Whose responsibility is it to ensure the VM APIs continue to work with
NAPI? Node’s or the VM owner’s?

@mhdawson: Depends on needs of Node and each VM.

We provide an `Environment*` pointer in each NAPI API, which gives deeper access
if necessary.

@aruneshchandra: How do we ensure buy-in from VM owners?

@rvagg: If NAPI is accepted downstream VM owners will have to participate.

@s3ththompson: The V8 team haven't yet uncovered any major issues, but we also
haven't done a full review of the proposal. Does NAPI constrain system design?
Does it constrain both/either Node or VM owners?

@jasnell: If there were to be a significant change in V8 which would affect NAPI
would V8 work together with us to address?

@s3ththompson: Hard part is defining an abstraction which provides enough wiggle
room for innovation.

@rvagg: Would be good to rephrase from “VM Neutrality,” which is somewhat
controversial, to “ABI Stable Node”, which is what is most important to users.

@mhdawson: Tested some sizeable modules, perf is within reasonable limits. Next
step is error handling. Also need more feedback from community.

API is C as we don't believe a C++ API can be as ABI-stable. However, we do want
to add some C++ sugar that would not be part of the ABI-stable API but which
would be inlined and only call the C API. A good example would be `NAN::New`.


Completed:

* Ported all NAN examples.
* Ported leveldown and nanomsg.

Next:

* Error handling
* Perf evaluation.

At that point make available to community and seek further feedback.

@mhdawson: A challenge is that now people can use anything in V8. We will need
to constrain and support only a subset.

That means this won’t work for 100% of modules, i.e. those which do significant
work specific to V8.

@jasnell: Are there things in Node which should also be part of this API?

@mhdawson: Some libuv abstractions were already in NAN, learning from some of
those.

Buffer is another example.

@aruneshchandra: Our plan is to review the native modules in CITGM to validate
they don't use anything outside of the existing API.

@thealphanerd: There are 4-5 native modules now in CITGM, we could add more.

@indexzero provided a list: <https://github.com/nodejs/abi-stable-node/issues/22>

Could we spin up a CITGM instance for testing NAPI in particular?

@thealphanerd: Some of the modules have unusual build steps, they’ll have to be
investigated. Also CITGM can take a script instead of the default test runner.

What are the next steps on the [EP](https://github.com/nodejs/node-eps/pull/20)?

@mhdawson: Wanted to land as a draft, but still only a PR. We don’t have answers
to all the questions so haven’t been able to get consensus.

@rvagg: Need to work on landing as a Draft, which is an intended thing. Add
approval of Node-EP to next week’s CTC agenda.

@aruneshchandra: At what point can we land this in the main repo?

@rvagg: Could land as experimental.

@jasnell: Once we land as experimental will there be a way to back out? See
v8_inspector as an example.

Discussion:
* Landing as experimental gives opportunity for more feedback.
* Would be behind a configure (build-time) flag, not as discoverable as a
  runtime flag, so less risk of premature dependence.

@aruneshchandra: Should we backport to previous versions to prove usefulness?

@mhdawson: At least 2 LTS's.

And Node-ChakraCore.

First cuts for v8.x to be at end of March, be ready to bring this in behind a
flag at that time.

@rvagg: Need to ensure CTC is in the loop. Can perhaps achieve that through
review of Node-EP.

@jasnell: What do we need to achieve to consider NAPI feature-complete? All of
V8 API?

@aruneshchandra: No, not all of V8, but all that is used by native modules.

@rvagg: But modules may use a lot of those APIs (e.g. garbage collection).

@mhdawson: We’re assuming that’s a low number and we won’t address those in the
first version.

@mcollina: In order to get ecosystem on board it needs to be extremely
compelling.

@aruneshchandra: Is the ability to stay with the same module across versions
sufficiently compelling?

@mcollina: It’s nice, but the problem isn’t that hard to work around. And it
only happens when a new major version of Node is released. Lack of ecosystem
buy-in could cripple the effort.

@rvagg: Consider Electron, which often has conflicts with Node.js native
modules.

@mcollina: That could be a compelling point.

@rvagg: We think mainly about the open source ecosystem, but don’t forget the
closed users.

@aruneshchandra: People may be misled when testing because their modules based
on V8 APIs still work.

@mhdawson: We can make sure not to provide the V8 headers in the NAPI includes.
So you’d get a compile time error if depending on V8 APIs.

@jasnell: Land as experimental behind a configure (build time) flag by v8.x.
Decide before v8.x LTS whether it can come out from behind the flag.

Then decide at v10.x if it will be fully supported.

**Next steps**:

* CTC to review
  [Node-EP for abi-stable-node](https://github.com/nodejs/node-eps/pull/20).
* V8 team to review
  [NAPI implementation](https://github.com/nodejs/abi-stable-node).
* NAPI team to test against more native modules in CITGM.
* Core/CTC to land as experimental behind a build-time flag in 8.0; and to evaluate
  bringing out from flag when 8.0 goes LTS (Oct 2017).


## FFI

@s3ththompson: V8 working on JIT-supported dynamic FFI - “Fast FFI”. Proof of
concept built which can call synchronous C functions from JS. Working on
extending to async functions. Next step is to prove in a real-world module.

Once polished V8 will publish in a branch on the V8 repo for evaluation.

It is as performant or even better than native code.

@ofrobots believes this could a solution for the needs of most native addons,
and requires less overhead.

We could push people to try to avoid C/C++ as much as possible.

@jasnell: How tightly coupled will this be with V8? How hard will it be to port
or do the same in Chakra and other VMs?

@s3ththompson: Same mechanism could be utilized in other VMs, implementation and
effects would be different.

@digitalinfinity: This would preclude running Node.js in environments where
allocating executable memory is not allowed.

Also depends on goals of native module ecosystem. If it’s to use existing C
libraries, FFI is useful. If it’s to further extend Node.js itself a native API
is more important.

@rvagg: FFI allows many runtimes to utilize same C library.

@piscisaureus: Has this been tested with significantly complex JS input?

@mrkmarron: Beware of the ease of use of FFI with legacy code, because legacy
code disrupts analysis and understanding of code.

@aruneshchandra: Do we need to choose one or the other?

@piscisareus: They shouldn’t be mutually exclusive.

@jasnell: Once things land in master, even as experimental, they are difficult
to revert.

@rvagg: Important to test against current set of modules and how they can be
covered with both/either Fast-FFI and NAPI.

@mcollina: Also need to consider migration path. Many existing modules in NAN.

@piscisareus: Could we implement NAN over NAPI to ease migration?

@mhdawson: NAN doesn’t cover all the needed abstractions, so some V8 usage is
still there. So exposing NAPI in terms of NAN won’t fix existing modules.

@piscisareus: Well then expose existing V8 APIs in terms of NAPI too!

@qard: Do we have to? Both NAN and NAPI can coexist.

@piscisareus: NAN will still be needed for those not comfortable with the NAPI C
API.

@jasnell: Would like to land them both as experimental. But would also like perf
numbers on both so we can understand and represent them both.

@jasnell: Will V8 have something usable by v8.x (April)?

@s3ththompson: Think so, need to check with Ali (@ofrobots).

@mhdawson: Would be good to have Chakra team review FFI work in V8.

**Next steps**:

* V8 to publish branch with Fast FFI implementation; Node Core and Chakra teams
  to review.

## VM Compliance Spec

Not ready to tackle this yet. First focus on ABI stable Node.js and FFI. Tackle
VM compliance later. Will need to consider ES support, diagnostic formats and
protocols support, etc.


## Next steps

* CTC to review
  [Node-EP for abi-stable-node](https://github.com/nodejs/node-eps/pull/20).
* V8 team to review
  [NAPI implementation](https://github.com/nodejs/abi-stable-node).
* NAPI team to test against more native modules in CITGM.
* Core/CTC to land as experimental behind a build-time flag in 8.0; and to evaluate
  bringing out from flag when 8.0 goes LTS (Oct 2017).
* V8 to publish branch with Fast FFI implementation; Node Core and Chakra teams
  to review.
* API WG to hold checkpoint with CTC in late February/early March 2017, demo
  and discuss NAPI and Fast-FFI.
* Checkpoint again in mid-July, perhaps in conjunction with a community
  conference.


