# VM Summit #3 - 2017-03-03

* Recording: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZRVjWhBEwB0
* Notes:
  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mIYQ6YjI2yUS07h5dtkXW-EKgyY2_XYjgVFaZt0Yagk

# Attendees (in person):

* James Snell @jasnell
* Dan Shaw @dshaw
* Josh Gavant @joshgav
* Hitesh Kanwathirtha @digitalinfinity
* Mark Marron @mrkmarron
* Arunesh Chandra @aruneshchandra
* Taylor Woll @boingoing
* Gaurav Seth @sethgaurav
* Ed Maurer @EdMaurer
* Jonathan Carter @lostintangent
* Jason Ginchereau @jasongin
* Matthew Loring @matthewloring
* Ali Ijaz Sheikh @ofrobots
* Alexis Campailla @orangemocha
* Gabriel Schulhof @gabrielschulhof
* Sampson Gao @sampsongao
* Michael Dawson @mhdawson
* Matteo Collina @mcollina
* Colin Ihrig @cjihrig
* Myles Borins @MylesBorins

# Agenda

* FFI
* N-API
* Logistics for landing in core
* Open discussion on related topics

# FFI

Presentation:
<https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1rLBk9Erx1pbqLUBjcq_V2bLsiSxfPWT36dC0yLfFMOE>

@mhdawson: What is needed in core and V8? @ofrobots: Needed APIs have to be
added to V8. FFI implementation could be encapsulated within a standalone native
module once those APIs are added.

The V8 capabilities necessary should also be abstracted within NAPI for other
VMs to implement.

@dshaw: Should we sketch out the equivalent NAPI API together today? @ofrobots:
Hoped to have more concrete proposal but we don’t. @mhdawson: Should we open a
public repo with current work and to continue conversation? @ofrobots: Perhaps
in a couple months, once we have a concrete proposal. @jasnell: Even a list of
open issues would be helpful.

@ofrobots: As module authors migrate to NAPI, some may be able to avoid C++
entirely and choose FFI instead.

@mrkmarron: Note that a strong FFI implementation exposes Node.js to the risk of
users taking more dependencies on legacy native code. That could interfere with
tools that help with diagnostics and optimizations.

Concern about error handling, for example, when a flow calls back and forth from
JS to native several times; exceptions might not propagate through multiple
back-and-forth calls.

@mcollina: Some native modules maintain state on the native side referenceable
from JS. How would that be addressed with current proposal? nanomsg in fact has
this issue, how did you handle it? @matthewloring: Did the best we could, would
be good to think about this more.

@mcollina: Simplest case is a synchronous call passing a couple primitives back
and forth. That’s useful but doesn’t address more complex modules which for
example may need access to native objects. @matthewloring: Considered providing
pointers within JS.

@matthewloring: FFI can provide strongly opinionated flows for common scenarios.
N-API addresses flows which require different opinions.

@jasnell: Since native APIs for FFI would be included in NAPI, other opinionated
flows could be developed too.

Timeline? Too early to say, not V8 5.7 or 5.8 so not the first release of Node
8.

Will it be possible to backport? @ofrobots: Probably not to 6.

Timeline for providing a public drop for collaboration? Part that depends on VM
implementation needs more maturity before sharing.

Can work on a shared type definition format now and utilize that for early
implementations.

**Next steps**

* Could begin discussing a shared type definition format now.
* Matt and Ali to continue work on FFI implementation in private, no timeline
  for public drop.

---

# N-API

Presentation:
<https://github.com/nodejs/abi-stable-node/blob/doc/VM%20Summit.pdf>

Error handling: NAPI captures errors and exceptions and module author can handle
as desired. Also possible to use `napi_throw` functions to throw an exception in
JS.

C++ API wrapper over C API for convenience, but not planning to include in core.

V8 Isolate APIs little used in modules and don’t plan to include in N-API.
[deasync](https://www.npmjs.com/package/deasync) uses many of these.

Demo from Arunesh: https://github.com/boingoing/napi_demo. Same native modules -
canvas, leveldown - used with 6, 8, and Node-ChakraCore.

Canvas perf regression is likely because there’s heavy usage of V8 APIs so much
more marshaling needed. Also first tried with C++ wrapper. No optimizations yet
either.

Non-NAPI modules don’t engage NAPI code.

Including in core behind a build flag would make it difficult to experiment with
since users would have to build Node themselves; so better not to hide behind a
build flag. But a opt-in runtime flag is needed.

How to handle compatibility as new capabilities are added to VMs and NAPI, e.g.
at Node’s or TC39’s initiative?

When backporting NAPI modules from e.g. 10 to 8, how to handle newer APIs?

Perhaps add a compiler flag for gyp which allows specifying target NAPI/Node
version at compile time. Compiler can include appropriate code paths.

Backward compatibility requires NAPI implementation to redirect unavailable
calls, so there’s a possible perf impact.

@Qard: Maybe we could have versioned additions, similar to Android API levels,
allowing module writers to specify their﻿ expected minimum version. Could
do something like `#include "napi/123.h"`. `napi/123.h` would﻿ internally
include `napi/122.h` and so on, so you just include your minimum version number
and it's either there or it's not.

For 8.0, include an opt-in runtime flag, show experimental warning when a NAPI
module is loaded.

Would changing to opt-out be a semver-major change? Would we allow that within
8.x at all? A: If we keep it experimental we can make bigger changes to it more
frequently.

Any objections to landing in 8?

* Need to be aware of potential ecosystem impact.
* Be prepared with any related semver-major changes at beginning of 8 release.

@jasnell: What’s the additional footprint? A: One C file and 3 headers, max
several hundred K.

@mcollina: Also check impact on heap size and GC behavior.

Get N-API into 8.0 as experimental with a runtime opt-in flag. Ideally include
in first beta, but may not be ready till second.

Mention FFI effort in N-API announcement, and that they’re complementary
efforts. No timeline for FFI.

Make sure to land complementary changes in node-gyp and
[node-pre-gyp](https://github.com/mapbox/node-pre-gyp).

@jasnell will encourage CTC’ers to review.

How can module authors and consumers differentiate between NAPI and NAN/V8 when
publishing and consuming modules?

Can NAPI be backported to older versions? Do we need to ensure NAPI can be used
in version 4? In 4.0.0?

Those who stay on old versions often do so because of incompatible native
modules.

When 8 is released, 4.x will go into maintenance, with only critical or security
patches. Need to see if people migrate away from 4.

But even if people are using 6, they often aren’t on the latest version of 6. So
how do we bootstrap use of NAPI on 6?

Possible solution: NAPI as a pre-compiled module usable in 4 too.

Should we only do that and not build it into the runtime? A: No. Would be good
to build it into later versions of runtime, but still support it in earlier
versions even if not updated.

Would be good to distribute as an external module compatible with earlier
runtime versions.

Will there be a performance cost? Maybe, but functional equivalence and greater
maintainability may be more important to authors.

V8 APIs have changed significantly since 0.10 so porting N-API back is more
work. @mhdawson: but it’s been done already. @mcollina: focus on 4+ first.

**Next steps**

* Build into 8, take feedback, then consider bootstrap problem and whether to
  provide as a module like NAN by October (LTS go date).
* Consider NAPI as a module *if possible* to speed ecosystem adoption.

---

# Related open discussion

## Agenda

* Inspector Protocol and Diagnostics compatibility
* Definition of compatible Node/VM implementation
* gyp/gn

## Inspector Protocol and Diagnostics Compatibility

How do we support Inspector in ChakraCore?

@joshgav proposed [#7393](https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/7393) a
relatively minor refactor to allow the same stack to interoperate with alternate
backend implementations. Conversation ongoing between V8 and Chakra on
implementing something like this.

What about different capabilities surfaced by both platforms, like TTD in
ChakraCore? @arunesh: Start with supporting base protocol as is in V8, then
consider additional capabilities.

What’s the relationship of N-API and Inspector?
* N-API is Node’s contract with native module authors.
* Inspector is Node’s contract with for diagnostics.

Is Inspector experimental, should support for alternate impls impact that? It’s
not really experimental anymore in actuality. Also, the implementation changes
required shouldn’t lead to API changes. So “experimental” tag isn’t that
relevant.

What about [node-heapdump](https://github.com/bnoordhuis/node-heapdump)?
@joshgav: Can also be exposed via node-inspect eventually.
@jasnell: should be compatible with all runtimes.
@mrkmarron: worked on heap snapshots as part of time-travel debugging. Trying to
make snapshot format as generic as possible, see
[comment](https://github.com/nodejs/post-mortem/issues/13#issuecomment-283865030)

llnode? llnode/lldb doesn’t even work on Windows :). Would need an adapter
between commands and engines.

---

## Definition of supported Node.js VMs

Our approach has been to tackle domains one by one: N-API, Inspector, heap
format, hosting.

Do SpiderNode and other VMs want to be supported? Yes and plan to snap to final
decisions, but might not have resources to contribute till then. Similar
feedback from JSCore.

### Hosting APIs

* N-API currently only represents the runtime API.
* Would the VMs provide a common hosting API, or would they want Node to
  implement that?

@ofrobots: More flexibility if VM owners can define their own hosting APIs. Not
used to adhering to standards since such a shared contract isn’t needed with
browsers.

@AruneshChandra: Wait to see adoption and reaction to N-API before going into
hosting APIs.

@mcollina: need to watch ecosystem adoption of alternate VMs, see if people find
value, and then take next steps.

Suggestion: Should we evolve NAPI to become native to VMs?

Suggestion: Should we implement all builtin modules in NAPI and allow them to be
loaded outside of node itself, e.g. in d8 and ch?

### ES Support

@jasnell: How to set minimum ES support for engines? Suggestion: Use Test-262 as
guideline and choose subset of features to implement in Node’s CI.

@williamkapke’s node.green runs Test262 on each engine.

How do we make this straightforward for VM developers? Suggestion: a linter
which checks for unsupported features.

How do we include minimal VMs which don’t support later ES features? Could they
still be valid VMs for Node? Could provide multiple profiles.

@dshaw: Currently no VM authors asking for smaller profile, so we shouldn’t pick
it up till that ask comes.

@jasnell: for now, if it’s green in both Chakra and V8 it’s on Node’s list. If
other VM authors ask for a more limited subset we can address it then.

We don’t truly need this set till another VM (e.g. ChakraCore) wants to state
that it’s production ready and not just experimental.

### Platform Support

Can we get Node-ChakraCore on other platforms? ARM should be possible. Could get
interpreter version running on long tail of platforms earlier. We could have a
separate list of supported platforms for ChakraCore.

Sentiment is that platform support doesn’t have to be a criteria for a
“certified” Node VM.

@mylesborins: could we have a Node conformance test? Could include (parts of)
Test262, WebCompatibilityTest, citgm. Different than current unit tests which
test functionality as is, not as it should be. Similar issues have come up when
behavior doesn’t match documentation.

## Build system (gyp/gn)

Native module ecosystem relies on gyp/node-gyp. All native modules have a \*.gyp
build file. Migrating to a different format would be a burden to authors;
automated translation would not address more complex uses of gyp.

In the near term CTC will maintain gyp. Fedor has proposed a JS implementation
of gyp, which Node would still have to maintain.

Probably easier to maintain gyp ourselves rather than try to switch to a
different build system.

@joshgav: Do we want to maintain our own build system? Or would it be better to
work with an existing build system like cmake?

@jasnell: Not particularly relevant to NAPI, which could work with existing
node-gyp. OTOH, introduction of NAPI could provide opportunity to switch system.
But best not to add something else with NAPI.

Seems like if/when gyp breaks, i.e. as its output format diverges from later
make, xcode, and VS versions, either we’ll step up and fix it or move on to
another system.

In conclusion, addressing gyp issue doesn’t seem to be on path for NAPI.

## Next steps

* Land NAPI as experimental behind an opt-in runtime flag for 8.
* Meet in summer (around NodeSummit) to:
  * Assess NAPI adoption and progress.
  * Revisit FFI progress.
  * Consider supporting old versions with a NAPI module.
* For further consideration:
  * What other domains need to be considered for true VM compatibility?

